- What is Optional Practical Training (OPT)?

Optional Practical Training (OPT) is designed for F-1 students to gain practical work experience in their major field of study for a total of up to 12 months, during their studies or immediately following their degree completion. Students are eligible for OPT once per each higher educational level. 

There are two types of Optional Practical Training:

1. Pre-Completion OPT, available before the student's program end date; and

2. Post-Completion OPT, available after the student's program end date.

Students who have completed a STEM degree may be eligible to apply for an extension of their OPT authorization. This is called STEM OPT Extension.

To be eligible for OPT, you:

Must have been enrolled full-time in F-1 student status for at least one academic year (two consecutive terms)
Must not have exceed 364 days of full-time CPT in your current program.
Do not need a job offer to apply.
More information about OPT can be found on our OPT webpage 'https://myusf.usfca.edu/isss/students/f-1/employment/optinfo'
Informative video url: 'https://usfca.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=c4243f9f-5f77-4e97-bb59-b26f006cbc36&start=0.696347'



- What is Pre-Completion OPT?

Pre-Completion OPT is a off-campus work authorization that can only be used during your studies. You can apply as early as 90 days before you reach the one academic year requirement. It can be a great option for students who have found a job they want to work over summer vacation but are not eligible for CPT authorization. 

 

When you are on Pre-Completion OPT, you:

must work less than 20 hours per week (part-time Pre-Completion OPT) in Spring or Fall session 
can work more than 20 hours (full-time Pre-Completion OPT) during school breaks (Summer or Winter Intersession). 
 

If you use part of your 12 month of OPT as Pre-Completion OPT, you will have to reapply and pay the filing fee again to use the remaining time for another period of Pre-Completion OPT or for Post-Completion OPT.

 

Students who use part-time Pre-Completion OPT deduct days at half the rate.

For example if you work for 5 months on part-time Pre-Completion OPT, only 2.5 months are deducted from the total 12 months.


- What is Post-Completion OPT?

Post-Completion OPT is the off-campus work benefit that can only be used after your studies (once you have met the requirements for your degree).

 

When you are on Post-Completion OPT, you:

can start work as early as the day after your degree completion (assuming filed graduation application in a timely manner)
can start work as late as 60 days after your degree completion (latest OPT start day)
must have full-time employment (over 20 hours per week)
 

Students are expected to work during the OPT period, and must report their employment on SEVP Portal. Students on Post-Completion OPT are limited to an aggregate maximum of 90 days of unemployment.

 

*Students who have completed all credit and course requirements but only have a thesis, dissertation, or equivalent requirement to complete, are eligible to apply for Post-Completion OPT. This may largely apply to our Doctorate level students.


- What is STEM OPT Extension?

STEM OPT is an additional 24 months of work authorization for students with a STEM qualifying degree. Only students who are on a period of approved Post-Completion OPT, with a STEM qualify degree, may apply for this extension. For the list of USF STEM eligible degrees, please visit our STEM OPT webpage.

 

During STEM OPT, your employer needs to be enrolled in the E-Verify system ('https://www.e-verify.gov/about-e-verify/what-is-e-verify'), your position needs to be paid and full-time (over 20 hours per week). All employment needs to be in your STEM major field of study. More information about STEM OPT can be found on our STEM OPT('https://myusf.usfca.edu/ISSS/STEMOPT')