What is your Program End Date and where can you find it?

Your Program End is the date when you complete your program requirements (usually the date of your last class or completion of your last assignment or exam). This date will typically be accurately reflected on the first page of your I-20 Form.

However, some students may complete their program earlier or require a program extension to complete their program later than the date listed on their I-20 Form.

What is a Grace Period and why is it important?

After you complete your program, you have 60 days to consider your options for staying in the U.S. also known as your 60 Day Grace Period. If you would like to stay in the U.S. be sure to consider your options before departing the U.S. During these 60 days you can travel within the U.S., but if you leave the U.S. you cannot re-enter in F-1 status. 

When is the OPT application window?

A student’s 5-month application period starts from 90 days before their program completion and ends 60 days after their program completion date in which USCIS must receive your OPT application.

It typically takes 3-4 months for an OPT application to be processed by United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS), so apply early.

When should you submit your OPT application after receiving your OPT I-20 Form?

When you receive your OPT I-20 Form, review the OPT information on the second page. Your OPT I-20 Form is valid for 30 days from the date the ISSS office recommended you for OPT. The OPT application must be submitted to USCIS within 30 days of this date.  Applications submitted with an OPT I-20 Form 30 days after initial issuance will result in an application denial. If you will exceed these 30 days, submit another OPT request via your MyISSS portal to receive a new OPT I-20 Form with a new validity period of 30 days.

When can you start working on OPT?

A student who finishes all program requirements can choose an OPT start date from one day after their program completion to 60 days after that date. This is a requested start date as USCIS processing is typically 3-4 months. Depending on processing times, your requested OPT start date may change. Please try to give USCIS 90 days of processing before your requested OPT start date.

It is very important to remember, you cannot start working before the OPT start date listed on the EAD card AND you must physically have possession of your EAD card to start working. Since the processing time for OPT can vary, you will need to communicate with your employer about your expected start date. 

Things to consider when determining your requested OPT start date are USCIS processing times, your expected employment start date, and travel plans. We welcome students to join us for an OPT Drop-In session to discuss your requested OPT dates.

When does your work authorization end on OPT?

The OPT end date will be 12 months after the student’s chosen OPT start date. The latest end date for a student on Post-Completion OPT will never be beyond 14-months after the student completes their program.

Use of Pre-Completion OPT impacts availability of Post-Completion OPT. Recall from our Pre-Completion section, students who use part-time Pre-Completion OPT deduct from Post-Completion OPT days at half the rate. While students who use full-time Pre-Completion OPT deduct at the full rate.

For example if you work for 5 months on part-time Pre-Completion OPT, only 2.5 months are deducted from the total 12 months. While if you work for 5 months on full-time Pre-Completion OPT, 5 months are deducted from the total 12 months.

If you are a student who has used Pre-Completion OPT, please speak with your International Student Advisor to determine your Post-Completion OPT eligibility.

Can students remain in the U.S. after finishing their period of OPT?

Students who complete their OPT period have a 60 Day Grace Period after their OPT has ended to stay in the U.S. to prepare for their departure, transfer to a new school and change their visa status. Students cannot work during this grace period. If you end your OPT early (before the end date listed on your OPT EAD card),  you are not afforded the 60 Day Grace Period and should depart the U.S. soon after ending your OPT.

Do you qualify for the 2-year STEM OPT Extension?

Students who are on a period of approved Post-Completion OPT and have a STEM-qualifying degree can apply for the 24-month STEM OPT extension. For a list of USF STEM-qualifying degrees, review our STEM OPT webpage (https://myusf.usfca.edu/ISSS/STEMOPT)  

When should students apply for the STEM OPT Extension?

Students should apply 90 days before their Post-Completion OPT expires. Once the Post-Completion OPT expires, students are no longer eligible to apply for the STEM OPT extension. To apply for STEM OPT you will need to submit the I-765 application and pay another application fee. For more information about the STEM OPT extension application process, please visit the F-1 STEM OPT Extension (STEM OPT) section of our International Student Employment webpage (https://myusf.usfca.edu/ISSS/STEMOPT)